---
title: Understanding Knowledge Management (Part 2 of 4)
---

# Understanding Knowledge Management — Part 2/4

Archaeology of Knowledge Management*

**A little joke for the Foucault fans*

This post is a continuation of a mini-series giving the general thrust of my recently completed thesis. You can find Part One [here](https://medium.com/project-management/cc6eeb374a1a).

The first post highlighted the problematic connotations of certainty and objectivity that accompany the terms ‘knowledge’ and ‘knowing’. Even the most basic analysis of the term soon draws up the reliance of truth on context and language. It was proposed that the Hermeneutic circle of Understanding and Interpretation described by Martin Heidegger may be a more suitable way to look at our sense-making process as this considers the influence of our previous experiences on our interpretations, and also removes the requirement for objectivity. Taking this as the case, Knowledge Management appears to have been built up around epistemological misinterpretations, leaving it, and its methods on shaky ground; but as mentioned previously, there is empirical evidence of successful Knowledge Management implementations to contradict this, and if it did not serve a purpose it would surely not be as prominent?

**This post attempts to strip back the current discourse permeating the subject and perform a brief archaeology of its roots, to see where Knowledge Management came from, and what it is trying to achieve. **Once this is done, it will be possible to see if a reinterpretation of our sense-making processes can achieve these goals, and what advantages this reinterpretation provides.

Taking knowledge to mean the skills/competences and information held by a worker (know-how and know-what going back to Ryle’s typologies) it is unclear when the concept of knowledge possessing value to an organisation. [Wernerfelt’s work in the mid-1980s](http://www1.ximb.ac.in/users/fac/Amar/AmarNayak.nsf/dd5cab6801f1723585256474005327c8/456e5a8383adcf07652576a0004d9ba5/$FILE/RBV.pdf) on the Resource-based view of the firm is one of the earliest formalisations to shift value away from products, to the efficient use of the resources and competences within an organisation, but there was little focus on ‘knowledge’. There was a spurt of work in the early 1990s that fixed upon knowledge as one of the most important of these resources. Knowledge Management has grown out of pointing out where the value is held in this knowledge and more importantly how to make use of it.

So where is the value? Repetition of tasks, repetition of mistakes, the inability to perform required tasks, the ability to carry out a task being lost when a certain employee leaves a company, a manager being unaware of the status of a task; these are problems that crop up in the workplace — problems that incur time costs. These are also issues that Knowledge Management sets out to tackle, [through the efficient development, capture, sharing and dissemination of Knowledge](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_management).

But back to our Knowledge Management historiology: **The academic work of the late ‘90s onwards likes to deploy a narrative where all of the early Knowledge Management work was based around the storage of knowledge in databases and subsequent methods of dissemination. **Regardless of the accuracy of this, this narrative is usually deployed to accuse these methods of being Information Management, before highlighting their own distinction between Information and Knowledge and describing that Knowledge Management requires a more human element. These distinctions often relied heavily on (mis)interpretations of the philosophical work Michael Polanyi produced on knowledge and its intrinsic link to beings. Essentially Polanyi described all knowledge of consisting of tacit and explicit aspects where explicit describes those aspects that can be articulated (i.e. turned into information) and tacit describes those which cannot. Polanyi described any attempts to articulate tacit knowledge as ‘self-defeating’, however a lot of authors (particularly Nonaka and Takeuchi) must have skipped this page or just ignored him as a lot of energy over the next decade was spent looking at methods to successfully extract and disseminate tacit knowledge.

All of this work (even Polanyi himself) treats knowledge as an object — sharable and unchanging — which we have explained it cannot be. It is tied to a being and its previous understandings — understandings which constantly change making it ephemeral and dynamic. There is a growing epistemological awareness that is moving to accept this view in some form or another, and there has recently been more work appearing on [‘Personal’ forms of Knowledge Management](http://www.emeraldinsight.com/journals.htm?articleid=17053495&show=abstract). However the state of play in Knowledge Management is in disarray: The concept is being pushed (and pushed hard), especially as a part of Project Management, but the concept is not fully formed. There is still no agreement on what Knowledge is.

Although this is a study of the generally accepted history of Knowledge Management, it is still a narrative, and all narratives have a point. It goes back to the time where Information Management and Knowledge Management diverged. The academics rejected information because it lacks context, and does not tell the whole story. This essentially makes it objective and static. The rejection of Information Management seemed to focus on information as codified (written data and symbols) and essentially visual. They therefore neglected the fact information is something that can be interpreted by all of our senses so can come in many forms (visual, audible etc.). If we are talking in terms of ‘sharing’ then we cannot produce knowledge but we can produce information by moving, talking or the creation of symbols (even though interpretations may differ however dependent on previous understandings!). This distinction between information and knowledge is important and before we reformulate the goals of Knowledge Management this must be explored further.

**It seems increasingly likely that knowledge is a metaphor;** ‘knowledge’ and ‘knowing’ are terms all too easily thrown around. The authors working on Resource-Based views were not focussed on knowledge, and its use as a loose metaphor was unimportant. But Knowledge Management should not have been allowed to develop as a field without an understanding of what knowledge is.

What is clear is that sharing knowledge is impossible so the methods must be re-evaluated. Jettisoning the term Information Management because of its removal of human connection was hasty. And although the concept of tacit knowledge seems to resonate with a lot of people, its terminologies may have led us down the wrong path.
