---
title: Understanding Knowledge Management (Part 1 of 4)
---

# Understanding Knowledge Management — Part 1/4

What Is Knowledge?

Knowledge Management is impossible. It is a concept that is constantly growing in popularity, with the adoption of initiatives such as those designed to store and disseminate information, and the arrangement of people in knowledge ‘communities’ becoming more commonplace. As if to cement its growing reputation as a discipline, the APM included Knowledge Management in the latest edition of their Body of Knowledge. It is not that these initiatives are pointless ( there is much empirical evidence to show their perceived worth — [take a look at this report](http://www.pwc.com/us/en/public-sector/publications/global-pm-report-2012.jhtml)) but that the underlying theory of these initiatives is mostly flawed. There has been a reluctance to engage with the philosophy of knowledge, which raises questions on how we are to manage knowledge without a full understanding of it. This series of posts is aimed at showing why Knowledge Management is impossible, and how a deeper epistemological analysis can improve how we meet the aims that Knowledge Management has developed around. It will attempt to develop a better understanding of what we mean by ‘knowledge’, what it is we are trying to achieve with ‘Knowledge Management’, and to try and produce some practical considerations if you yourself ever go down the KM route. This passage looks at what we mean by ‘knowledge’, and why we cannot ‘manage’ it.

### **Knowing:**

What do you mean when you say you ‘know’ something? Is it that you are certain about a property of something? “I know that my car is blue”. Or is it related to skills? “I know how change that light bulb”. Indeed Gilbert Ryle developed this distinction between ‘know-that’ and ‘know-how’ and this dichotomy forms the basis of many epistemological analyses in one form or another. The certainty attached to ‘know-that’ claims means this type of knowledge is attacked by [sceptics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_skepticism) who claim that you cannot ‘know’ anything with certainty, due to doubt and ambiguity. For instance, [watch this video](http://www.boreme.com/posting.php?id=30670) (3:03 onwards) and then imagine trying to tell a member of the Himba tribe you know your car is blue. You find what you ‘know’ is drowned not only in language, but in how your brain has developed to perceive light as colour. You may think that ‘know-how’ and skills are more straight forward — you can either do something or you can’t. The problem here is not only are there different ways to do things, but different levels of success and most importantly, the measures of success also rely on language, perception, rules and frames-of-reference in the same way. Do you know how to drive a car? Yes? Brilliant, I have a [Ford Model T](http://www.barrett-jackson.com/application/onlinesubmission/lotdetails.aspx?ln=39&aid=443) that I need you to pick up for me.

Both the cases of ‘know-how’ and ‘know-what’ are reliant on frames-of-reference generated externally to beings. Knowing now appears to be social, reliant on agreement — be it agreement on the meaning of terms, or what adequate skill performance constitutes. It is here we begin to see how Michel Foucault conceived of [power/knowledge](http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/766400/power-knowledge) (pouvoir/savoir) — the idea that the two are intrinsically related — that power dictates truth, and vice-versa.
> “Men govern (themselves and others) by the production of truth” Michel Foucault

### **Understanding and Interpretation — Knowing as a Subspecies:**

Looking at existential philosophy gives us relief from the pressure of ‘knowledge’. It allows us to look at how we make sense of things in a way that allows us to move past the problems of scepticism. In *Being and Time*, Martin Heidegger proposes understanding is a basic aspect of our existence. It is important to emphasize that the understanding he speaks of is not a deliberate, cognitive phenomenon, but something that is constant for a being (It is hard to elucidate the concept fully without a good understanding of Heidegger’s work, but it must be understood that understanding is not a conscious choice!). Our understanding always develops, and this development of understanding is referred to as interpretation by Heidegger. What is most important to note, is that this interpretation emerges from our previous understandings (this cyclical nature is referred to as the ‘hermeneutic circle’).

There are numerous important points that arise from considering the above. The self-referential nature of understanding means that a transcendental, certain knowledge becomes simply an ideal — ‘a sub-species of understanding’ as put by Heidegger. This highlights the fact that knowledge is simply a word — a product of language — and an idea we have invented. It is important that what is being highlighted here is not misunderstood — the impossibility of certain transcendental knowledge is not to become anti-scientific and subjective! In fact it means quite the opposite, and elevates the importance of rigorous investigation, experimental evidence and rational thought to new heights. Viewing knowledge as impossible means the quest for information should never stop — in this way truth shall never be finalised. It simply means that no matter how objective our observations may be, they are rooted in some sort of social discourse.

Our understandings are subject to social influences, we develop within cultures/localities that allow our understandings to develop similarly to other beings within these spheres– this can be seen in the example of languages. Because we have similar frames of reference, this has created the illusion that we can interpret things in the same manner, and created the illusion of objective knowledge.

### **Why this is all a problem?:**

For the most part, this is not a problem — we do make sense of things in different ways, however it seems we are tacitly aware of this uncertainty, compensating with feedback loops and increasing the media-richness of our methods of delivering information. What we do seem to be quite unaware of however, are the social and institutional influences on how we share knowledge, and what we consider to be truth or success. These aspects were looked at in my recent thesis, and will be covered in subsequent posts.
